---
title: Ear training
weight: 100
---

Have you ever been impressed with someone's ability to hear a song once and
instantly be able to play it? A proportion of musicians who have that ability
have what we call perfect pitch: the ability to instantly recognise the name of
a note based on its pitch. This ability is developed early in childhood and
cannot be developed later. The rest of the musicians who can play music by ear
have relative pitch. They may not be able to tell you the name of a note based
on its pitch, but give them a point of reference, and they will be able to tell
you anything. Relative pitch, unlike perfect pitch, can be trained, and can also
be more powerful than perfect pitch.

Aside from being able to play songs by ear, why would we want to spend our time
training our ears? As mentioned in the [Sight-reading chapter]({{< ref "/book/chapter-7/#audiation" >}}), audiation is a
core sub-skill of sight-reading. Improving our ears will help with our ability
to read ahead and mentally prepare for the music we are about to play. Having a
good ear also means that we don't need to rely on sheet music to learn.
This is especially useful if we want to venture away from classical music into
pop, jazz, and blues genres. It means that whatever we listen to, we can learn.
It removes any barriers to learning. Hearing music and being able to play it
also applies to music we hear in our head -- music that we are composing, or
improvising. If we have a well trained ear, we can translate any musical idea
from our mind to our hands immediately, without having to think.  If you think
about it more, you will be able to find more benefits of having good ears beyond
what I mentioned above, but hopefully that won't be needed because you are
already convinced.

## What to hear

Having a well-trained ear means we are able to recognise the following:

- pitches, melodies
- chords, chord voicings
- chord progressions
- rhythms

Having this list at hand makes it easy for us to target areas of practise that
need work. Anything we could want to improve should fall under one of those
categories.

## How to train

The first step to developing your ears is to build awareness. Hopefully the
foundation is already present from following the lessons from the [Musicality]({{< ref "/book/chapter-2" >}})
chapter. I won't go into any more detail here.

### Audiation

Before
we are able to connect the sound of music to its theoretical meaning, we have to
be able to hear it in our mind's ear. Beyond the basic foundational training of
being able to *listen* to music, we now need to be able to produce it in our
head.

Audiation is best practised with the piano in front of you, it will allow you to
ingrain the full sound in your head. Unfortunately I do not remember the name of
this exercise, I did not come up with it, but it is a great exercise to work on
audiation.

Play a note at the piano, and let it fill your mind. Hear it resonating inside
your head. Hear the fundamental frequency and all of the overtones that make up
its unique spectral profile. Do the same for different notes.

Once this is easy, play two notes simultaneously, mentally separate them and
follow the same steps as above.

Add more and more notes. As you do so, you may want to check that you are
correct, or you may need some nudging to be able to separate the notes. It is
fine to play the note separately to give you some help.

When learning a piece, there are also plenty of opportunities to work on
audiation, here are some examples:

- play one hand while hearing the other
- play chords with missing notes, and hear the missing notes
- leave gaps when playing, and fill them in your mind

The ability to imagine music in your head will make the ear training much
easier. I would recommend spending a lot of time on this; it will be a
worthwhile investment.

### Imitation game

A game I used to play with my students and they loved consisted of me defining a
set of notes we would use, and playing a little melody with those notes.
Without looking, they had to repeat the melody I played. To make it more
complicated, I would make the phrase longer, or add more notes to the set. It
worked really well because knowing the set of notes means that the student can
learn to hear to relationship between them (high, low, distance) and not get
bogged down on the notes themselves.

If you have a friend to play this with, it can be incredibly fun trying to push
and outdo each other. Otherwise if you are by yourself, you can play a variation
of it where you pick the set of notes, and write the order of the melody using
numbers. Your task then, is to hear the numbers in your head, and check if you
are correct by playing it. You could also skip writing the numbers and just hear
a melody in your head using the set of notes, and try to play it on the piano.

### Functional ear training

Most music that we listen to, and learn is functional. The term functional means
that chords and notes have a particular function that they play in the context
of the music. For example, in the key of C, C has the function of the tonic.
When we play C, it means we are home, we have landed.
G, on the other hand has the function of the dominant, usually it will take us
back to C. The most common chord progression in all of music is the V-I, in C:
G-C. Functional ear training means we learn notes and chords in the context of a
key, where the function of those notes and chords is what differentiates them.

Below are a few apps and websites to train:
- Functional Ear Trainer phone app ([iOS](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/functional-ear-trainer/id1088761926), [Android](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.kaizen9.fet.android&hl=en-US))
- [Website](https://tonedear.com/ear-training/functional-solfege-scale-degrees) (also contains more ear training resources beyond functional ear
  training)
- [Computer software](https://www.miles.be/software/functional-ear-trainer-v2/)

### Chords

The imitation game and functional ear training are great for hearing notes and
chords in context. I wanted to also mention the importance of learning to
recognise chord qualities (major, minor, diminished, etc.) and extensions
outside of a functional context. 

You should be able to recognise whether triads and seventh chords, and
eventually be able to identify their inversion. Aside from the obvious
suggestion to practise using an app (I particularly love this one), there is one
more exercise (more of an extension of the audiation exercise) that I wanted to
show.

Play a chord. In your mind, highlight one of the chord tones. You should be able
to do this for different inversions and by removing the note from the chord.
Also try playing only the triad, and audiating different extensions.

Being able to identify the details about a chord will be useful to supplement
the functional ear training. Functional ear training will tell you that the
chord is a IV, and this training will tell you it is a major 7 chord with a #11
and a 13.

### Transcription

Exercises like the ones above are good for specifically developing certain
aspects of our ear, but eventually, we want to put our good ear to use by
transcribing music. I talk about transcription in more depth in the [Creativity]({{< ref "/book/chapter-9/#transcription" >}})
chapter.

Ultimately, transcription is what will keep developing your ear indefinitely.
You may master the exercises above, but transcription knows no limits. You can
transcribe a saxophone solo? Great, what about a jazz trio? What about an entire
orchestra? You get to decide what you want to improve and you get to transcribe
music for that purpose.
